Fromm Hansel minutes.com. It's Hanselman.
It's a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan here to announce
show number 52 recorded Wednesday,
February 20th, 2007. Support for Hanselman is
provided by slash fan software
red carpet subscriptions. The most
comprehensive solution for adding connectivity
to your.net and asp.net applications
with components for every major
internet protocol online@wwwdotnsoftware.com. Support is
also provided by.net developers journal
the world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott and Carl, talk about
the end to end tracing
format. Hi, this is Carl Franklin
and you're listening to Hansel
minutes from Hansel minutes.com. I'm
here with Scott Hanselman. How
are you, sir? I'm pretty
good. How's it going? Excellent.
Alright, that's down to business.
Hey, quick one. Cool. I
wanna talk about end to
end tracing. You've probably done
tracing like system dot diagnostics
dot trays and stuff like
that. Sure. But I'm more
and more at my company.
We're having to do tracing
amongst multiple machines, multiple services.
We really want to be
able to trace a particular
user like one guy amongst
thousands and thousands of guys
that are online or a
one particular transaction through the
entire system from web server
to web service from web
service to business object, to
maybe another machine or many
machines all the way back
to what we call a
host, but what you would
probably call a database and
a and then back. So
I've been looking into this
kind of stuff. And well,
we use WCF. We use
Indigo in a number of
places and Indigo uses this
thing called end end tracing.
We want to be able
to use end to end
tracing in places that aren't
necessarily Indigo, Indigo related or
WCF related. So it turns
out that, you know, there's
a lot of tracing stuff
that's built into the.net framework
to, Oh, particularly this really
interesting XML format. That's the
end to end tracing format.
It's a, it's an XML
format, but it's not really
XML. It's kind of an
interesting thing. This is part
of the XML writer, trace
listener. It's a, it's a
listener that you add to
your config files, you know,
so you'd go in and
you'd say the listener that
I'm going to be using
for tracing is the system
dot diagnostics dot XML writer
trace listener. And it writes
out XML except the XML
has no root node, right?
It's just the data portion,
right? It's just a fragment.
So it says E trace
event. And then it has
things like the log level
and the source and things
like that. And then a
configurable amount of application data
that you can add into
the trace record. You can
go and say, well, I
just want to see the,
the message headers, the soap
headers, or I want to
see the entire message depending
on the level of logging.
So what's interesting about end-to-end
tracing is that I might
have a well let's use
like an pretend. amazon.com is
kind of a situation. I've
got an asp.net website and
it's going to be doing
some tracing. And I want
to go and say, save
book, that's going to be
an activity that's going to
occur on the web server.
Then we maybe will call
out to another machine that
is running a web service.
We've left that process. We've
left the machine. Maybe within
that machine will call into
a couple of in-process business
objects in the process of
saving our book. And then
maybe I'm going to call
out again to either another
component or I'll call out
into a database, a component
or a data access layer.
This, all of this tracing
activity that could potentially occur
typically goes into a text
file. You've probably done tracing
before, and it's kind of
a hassle to correlate all
that information. This end to
end tracing format. This the
one I'm talking about is
a Microsoft specific one, but
if you Google around for
end to end tracing, you'll
see that more and more
people are interested in this
Oracle and IBM everyone's everyone's
into NDN tracing in this
instance where it is talking
about this Microsoft XML format,
you can write out to
tracing from all of these
different systems. Then open up
a, a tool that actually
comes with the, the windows
SDK it's called the service
trace viewer. It's at shrink
stir slash M M as
in mom, M 45. And
this is a, the service
trace viewer is something that
actually comes with the, the
platform SDK, but it's primarily
used around a WCF services.
But one of the points
that we're going to want
to get across in this
particular podcast is that you
don't need to necessarily use
WCF to get good tracing.
Okay, so you open this
guy up and I've got
them open right now. And
I'm going to go and
say file open. And then
I can just pick a
log file and go and
say file, add file, add,
file, add, and open many
of them. And they'll all
correlate to each other. So
I might have one text
file that came off of
the web server. Another text
file that I got off
of the off of the
database box or off of
the business services box or
off the web services box,
add them all together. And
the trick is this notion
of the correlation manager. There's
this correlation ID, basically, it's
just a goo that lives
a as like a conversation
ID lives in the header
of this particular trace event.
So you need to keep
this goo at the same
as you move from activity
to activity and any activity
that you want to be
correlated, you have the same
good. That's pretty amazing. I'm
looking at the screenshots they
have here on the screenshots
are high. Okay, good. So
the screenshots that you're looking@areupatprobablyashrinkstir.com
slash M 47 and a
notice in the screenshot that
there's a chart. There's like
a graph moving from left
to right where you've got
one activity goes down kind
of the, the Y axis
there. And you've got like
client and that's one process,
multiple activities within that process.
The trick there is using
this correlation manager along with
multiple activity IDs. So basically
you have to transfer control
from one activity to the
next, and this is up
to you to do that.
And this, you have to
do that in your code,
right? You basically have this
correlation ID. When you know
that you're about to jump
out to somewhere else. You
can go and make a
new activity ID, set it,
and then do a trace
dot transfer. So one of
the important aspects of end
to end tracing is the
notion of transferring between an
activity. You know, I might
want to say complete, complete
purchase. That might be the
business level activity, the guy
on the web server, but
the website rather click the
button complete purchase. But within
that might be smaller activities
like verify credit card and,
you know, take money out
of his account and things
like that. So you want
me to transfer between activities,
representing those relationships between the
different events. So you'll start
a new activity and then
you might have a, you
know, a good associated with
that. And you'll create, what's
called a trace source and
you'll, you'll give it some
name. And then you'll stored
in like thread local storage
is this activity ID. And
this is actually sitting right
on the trace object. You've
used system dot diagnostics dot
trace. So in Donna two,
Oh, there's a new static
that's sitting right on trace
called the correlation manager. And
then you can go and
grab the activity ID off
of that. So you say
trace that correlation manager activity
ID, and that's a good
then if you're going to
be doing a new activity,
you know that you're about
to call out somewhere. You
can go and say a
trace transfer. I'm going to
be transferring to another activity
and we'll pass in a
new good. And we'll say
that our activity is going
to stop. And this new
one's going to start up.
So just before you call
out, you do that. And
then getting back to what
you were talking about with
these screenshots, for that to
show up in the trace
viewer as a different activity,
that's what needs to happen.
That transfer of control. Now,
your activity, what you were
doing can continue to work.
Maybe it's doing work, you
know, asynchronously, or you're about
to call out to something
asynchronously the trick. Is that
any activity that you want
to show up in the
viewer as being discreet, it
has to have that particular
new goo. It makes sense.
Yeah. So if you look
at screenshot, you can see
that there are places where
it transferred control off to
another activity, but continue to
work on its own. So,
Scott, let me just interrupt
you real quick here. Applications
for this. I mean the
obvious conspiracy theorist in me
says big brother is watching,
but you know, that's, that's
mundane. The real issue here
is tracing when you have
problems. But exactly when you
get to that point where
you have your website, you
know, the phone starts ringing
off the hook because people
are, it's blowing up in
the shopping cart or something
like that. Do you really
have time to go and
implement a tracing tool? And
if you implement it beforehand,
is there any performance hit
if you're not using it?
Yeah. So you're bringing up
a number of really good
issues now. So before people
blow off your big brother
thing, that's a very valid
point. You always, when you're
dealing with stuff, have to
make sure that you don't
trace important or, or sensitive
data. You know, that's something
that Kirlian is really specializes
in is not doing that.
We've got filters and things
to prevent passwords and credit
cards and things like that
from ever being a, you
know, touching desk. That's very
important aspect of things. Okay?
So you've got a couple
of different questions or different
systems can be named with
these trace sources. So some
thought has to go into
this upfront, but the tray
source will allow you to
go and say, I want
to have different log levels
for different systems. So one
trade source might be the
website. Another might be the
business logic. Another might be
the credit card validation control.
If you're having trouble with
a particular aspect of the
system, you can turn up
logging just for that one
bit, turn it up to
debug or turn it to
warn to let you know
what's, what's going wrong. It's
definitely difficult to go into
a system that already exists,
that hasn't had the thought
put into it and instrument
it for tracing. So this
is definitely something that you
want to think about upfront,
and it might, some people
might disagree with my perspective,
but targeting the trace viewer
is a good way to
get an understanding about what
are you really thinking activity
is it's an easy thing
to go and say, well,
you know, each thread is
an activity, but you have
to ask yourself, do you
want an activity to be
a logical thing or a
physical thing? So actually watching
the trace happen in your
code, even if you're not
looking for a bug can
help you solidify the process.
Yeah, Yeah, absolutely. One of
the things that we're currently
working on and we've had
a little trouble with is
doing tracing within a workflow.
We've found that because the
workflow control uses a thread
dynamic, right? Yeah. It's very
dynamic. We're seeing some of
our activities showing up on
different threads, basically reality. The
logical reality of our business
isn't being reflected very well
in the, in the trace
viewer because threads are being
reused and the activity ID
is staying around. So what
we're having to do is
make sure that our, our
particular messages that we pass
through the system includes this
activity ID. And then when,
when the workflow control the
workflow engine rather wakes up,
we stick our activity ID
back in there to make
sure things line up. So
it's it had us thinking,
well, gosh, even though the
physical reality is that the
workflow control does this. We
really want our logical, you
know, transactions to flow through
this system and look this
way. So some thought about
what exactly is the source
here? Do we even want
to expose the fact that
the workflow is involved or
is it really more about
the activities and controls that
the workflow is doing? So
it has to get you,
you have to think about
what is your root activity
in this case, maybe save
book and then your nested
activities. And do you want
your tray sources to look
at things in the, in
the process level or at
the component level, you can
create also a logical active,
you know, logical operations hanging
off of the, the correlation
manager is this logical operations
stack, the correlation managers, just
the base class of all
of this stuff. Right, right.
It's kind of, it's kind
of the thing that just
makes, makes it easy for
you. It's the, it manages
the, the activity ID. It
manages the storage on, on,
on the call context. And
it includes this logical operation
stack. That basically you just
say I'm about, I'm about
to start a logical operation.
So you call start operation.
It pushes something on the
stack and then you hit
stop operation. Now, this is
a tough topic to talk
about for a, a podcast
or a podcast. No question.
So take a look at
the trace viewer. All the
links are on the site,
shrink stir slash em, 45
46, 47, 48 and 49.
So these are shrink stir
URLs, www dot shrink, stir.com/m
as in mom, M 45
through him 49. These are
different pointers within MSDN to,
to give you information about
tracing and why tracing is
important. You really have to
see this trace viewer to
understand why this, this can
be really powerful. But even
though WCF is kind of
the, the best, greatest example
of tracing in our system,
we don't always have WCF
services talking to each other.
So we've had to go
into our other services that
aren't Indigo services and just
use that particular trace, trace
writer, the XML trace writer,
but the viewer doesn't really
care. It's okay that we're
not using WCF. We can
still use the WCF trace
viewer to do that work.
And that's been really nice.
What's the live service trace
viewer. So, so one of
the things that is kind
of being worked on, and
I'm not really clear if
this is something that is,
is still actively being, being
worked on the, the, the
site is pretty old. But
if you go up to,
I think it's shrink stir
M for B, this is
a trace viewer by two
kind of technology evangelists that
lets you look at the
system live while it's happening.
So you can actually see
the activities as they are,
are going down. And it's
based on a WPF as
well. So they're using WCF
underneath, but WPF. So it's
the painting, the, the model,
the, the, the UI of
this is all Avalon, and
this is done by a
guy named Craig McMurtry, and
then a guy that I've
actually met a couple of
times, he's come to some
Kirlian user's conferences named Victoria,
but touchy. Now the site
is from gosh, 2006, and
it's a beta, I don't
know. Maybe they'll listen to
this and they'll let us
know that it's happening, but
there's actually a channel nine
interview up there on this.
We've got this, this working
internally with our, our stuff.
I don't know if we'll
end up using it. One
of the things that we've
been thinking about, and we're
just brainstorming here is that
of course sticking all of
this XML and text files
may not be ideal, but
because this is all built
into the fundamental dotnet to
O tracing infrastructure, certainly this
XML format could be thrown
into SQL 2005. Sure. And
the, the schema could be
associated with it. This is
something that Patrick Caldwell has been
thinking about. And then you
could do some pretty interesting
querying on SQL server, if
you wanted to do forensics,
like after the fact not
necessarily live, but a couple
of days later, and then
doing some queries, strip out,
maybe all of the activities
that our user did. So
Carl could call in later
and say, Hey, you know,
I transferred some money yesterday.
Can you take a look
at that? We have a
formal auditing process and an
audit log already for things
like financial services. So I
want to make sure you
understand that tracing, that kind
of logging and maybe auditing
for the purposes of making
sure the money got work,
you know, where it needed
to go are really different
things. But if you said,
I saw something weird happen
during my session yesterday, and
we had the log levels
turned on, I could query
the database and then pull
the logs back out as
XML after the fact. Right.
And then do my tracing
and my forensic work afterwards.
That's great. Hey, you know,
just as an aside, I
saw this, the software that
I've installed and it's kind
of intriguing, although I'm not
sure how useful it is.
It's, who's on.com and it's
called who's on you install
it. It's a.net app. It
installs on NIS and it's
sort of like a live
log communication thing. So you
run a class. Yeah. Who's
on your site right now,
A client, and you can
see IP address. You can
hook it up to geographic
information and you can sort
of watch them go through
your website. Some issues with
it I have is that
it scrolls it doesn't when
it scrolls it doesn't like
automatically bring you to the
last item in the list.
Like it scrolls and continuously
leaves the most oldest one
at the top of the
list. Sure. It doesn't seem
to be any way to
sort it or anything. It's
kind of annoying, but a
idea though, the idea is,
is It city of live,
live instrumentation? So, I mean,
and Dan tracing, and what
we're trying to talk about
is, is really the notion
of fully instrumenting your application
so that, you know, what's
going on without having to
get in and make a
live debugging session. And the
tools that you're talking about
end to end, or sort
of like, you know, for
bits and bytes and developer
kind of what's going on
in the code. And I
would say who's on, is
more for like, you know,
ROI business professionals to see
what their, see, how their
websites are being used or
utilized and things like that.
And this brings them, you're
bringing up a good point
because when you instrument your
application, who is your, who
is your, your audience? You
know, you want to instrument
it for the purposes of
the business person who wants
to know, like you say,
who's on the site. We
instead, we like to instrument
things for forensic analysis to
come back later and say,
what exactly happened? How did
that go down? Something weird
happened in the site. And
I want to know exactly
at what point it fell
apart. We can also use
this at some level for,
you know, for some performance
to get a general idea
of, of when something moves
through the site. And I'm
not doing formal performance testing,
but I want to see,
gosh, I spent a long
time on that one in
that one place on that
one service, certainly all of
this stuff is easy to
do a few using WCF.
You just, I'm putting these
sources in your system dot
diagnostic section of your applications,
config, and you just let
it know that you want
activity tracing turned on. And
there's lots of information on
MSD on about how to
do that. Setting up your
trace source allows you to
do things with different log
levels. And then certainly your
existing applications can do this.
Using this XML writer, trace
listener, you can have existing
enterprise services, existing websites that
maybe are going to become
consumers of WCF, or maybe
you have an existing web
service. So if you start
introducing complexity at this level,
like large systems that involve
multiple hops, even if it's
not WCF, you can start
doing end to end tracing.
And even if you not
going to do tracing on
more than one system, even
if end to end to
you is all within one
asp.net application. You know, it'd
be interesting to take some
of the administration tools that
we have that run Hansel
minutes.com plugins some end to
end tracing and get an
idea of how these transactions
flow through the system. Very
good, Scott, thanks a lot.
It's been great shows always.
And we'll see you again
next week on Hansel minutes.